---
layout: commitment
title:  "To support greater transparency and accountability in our criminal justice system, the Executive Order directed the Attorney General to establish the National Law Enforcement Accountability Database as a centralized repository of official records documenting instances of law enforcement officer misconduct as well as commendations and awards for all Federal law enforcement agencies."
permalink: /national-action-plan/5/us0147-1/
c_permalink: /national-action-plan/5/us0147/
commitment_id: US0147
commitment_theme_name: Ensure Equal Justice Under the Law
commitment_detail_sub: "To support greater transparency and accountability in our criminal justice system, the Executive Order directed the Attorney General to establish the National Law Enforcement Accountability Database as a centralized repository of official records documenting instances of law enforcement officer misconduct as well as commendations and awards for all Federal law enforcement agencies."
commitment_detail_sub_id: "US0147.1"
commitment_agency: Department of Justice
---

Executive Order 14074 requires the Department of Justice to establish a National Law Enforcement Accountability Database that includes information related to law enforcement officer terminations, de-certifications, criminal convictions, resignations, sustained complaints for serious misconduct, civil judgments, and commendations. The EO requires federal law enforcement agencies to report this information to the database, but it is voluntary for state and local agencies to submit information.

The Justice Department is currently making design decisions about the database to ensure that it can properly receive this information, while addressing the privacy, security, and due process concerns identified in the EO. Recognizing the many important questions the Department needed to answer, including the scope of available data and existing databases on this topic and the desirability and feasibility of different models, the Department hired a subject-matter expert to conduct a feasibility study and provide options and recommendations for how to design, set up, and implement the database.

Over the course of 6 months, the expert reviewed best practices and possible designs for a database that can accurately track officer decertification and misconduct as outlined in the EO, while protecting privacy and respecting appropriate due process protections for officers. After reviewing the expert’s feasibility study, the Department is in the process of making design decisions regarding its establishment. These decisions are ongoing.

Content from the May DOJ Fact Sheet: 
[https://www.justice.gov/d9/2023-05/Policing%20EO%20-%20DOJ%20Fact%20Sheet%20Final_508.pdf](https://www.justice.gov/d9/2023-05/Policing%20EO%20-%20DOJ%20Fact%20Sheet%20Final_508.pdf)

“Partnered with the International Association of Directors of Law Enforcement Standards and Training (IADLEST) to establish the National Law Enforcement Accountability Database. IADLEST runs the National Decertification Index (NDI), a national registry of law enforcement de-certification and revocation actions relating to officer misconduct that is currently used by all fifty states and the District of Columbia. The Department is working with IADLEST to: (1) expand upon the existing NDI to include the additional categories of information required by the Executive Order; and (2) establish a system for making available Federal law enforcement records based on the NDI model. The Department aims to have the database launched by the end of the year."